The coming of the 1960s marked the end of termination--a series of policies aimed at stripping Native Americans of their legal status as distinct peoples. However, the end of this era sparked the beginning of a series of efforts by indigenous peoples to achieve a level of self-determination unprecedented since the arrival of the Europeans in North America. Although indigenous peoples faced a variety of limits on their sovereignty by the dominant society, in the aftermath of termination, they exercised an unparalleled degree of economic, cultural, and political self-determination, particularly through Indian gaming, repatriation, and land restitution.
Native nations have exercised their sovereignty by practicing economic self-determination, aided significantly by the introduction of Indian gaming. A result of the urbanization of Native Americans throughout and following termination, Native Americans experienced a variety of urban issues. The "greater access to higher education and employment opportunities" of an urban setting came along with "high poverty rates, in some large cities exceeding 30 percent"ù("We Are,"ù Ch. 7, 244). The primarily urban twentieth and twenty-first century Native American population was disproportionately poor; though many were still connected to reservation spaces, there was an emphasis on solving these tribal issues with tribal programs, especially in health, education, and language, relying on tribal knowledge to help deal with the present. A major victory in allowing Native American communities to use their money as they saw fit, however, was the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act. The act "allowed certain forms of gaming to take place on reservations" ("We Are,"ù Ch. 6, 206-207), offering "Indian communities the chance to provide new jobs and new housing and thus enable more of their residents to remain on the land" (207). The IGRA provided nations with the money needed to exercise the economic autonomy guaranteed to them through treaties through infrastructure, healthcare, education, and political influence. This, in turn, allowed for greater cultural self-determination, as it allowed many Native Americans to remain in their homelands and continue to practice their customs as they saw fit. However, Native Americans were presented with the issue of non-Indian opposition to Indian gaming. In 1987, for example, Senator Henry Reid  requested that the state of Nevada takes control of Native American gaming, presenting the issue not as "a question of Indian sovereignty" (Senator Harry Reid Requests 530) but as a "moral obligation to ensure that tribal enclaves to not become sanctuaries for organized crime" (530). Non-Indians usually saw Indian gaming as an unfair advantage that could be taken away; in reality, Native Americans hold the inherent right to economic self-determination and were guaranteed federal support through treaties in exchange for land. However, gaming has presented an issue for some Native Americans as it involves nation-to-state agreements and a resulting blow to political sovereignty; to others, however, the economic self-determination is a worthy offset.
In the face of a variety of cultural issues such as lack of visibility, Native Americans have been able to achieve a great degree of cultural self-determination through pan-tribal movements and the repatriation of Native remains. In her description of how the Menominee overcame termination, Ada Deer describes perfectly the goal of Red Power activism and other forms of pan-tribal movements, stating that "[w]e have to have visibility, and...there is not enough of us Indians, so we have to make our presence count" (Ada Deer Explains 498). Often seen by the dominant society as objects of the historical past rather than an integral part of American history, Native Americans suffered and continue to suffer from invisibility or being seen as a race rather than distinct cultural identity due to their status as a small percent of the U.S. population during the modern era. Resultantly, pan-tribal movements such as the Occupation of Alcatraz or the Occupation of Wounded Knee focused on this cultural issue of visibility. "[O]n February 27, 1973, AIM [American Indian Movement] members and their allies took over the village of Wounded Knee" ("We Are," Ch. 5, 166) understanding "the symbolic value of this particular location" (166) and "bringing worldwide media attention to Native issues...and to the goals of AIM leaders" (167). By banding together in solidarity, members of many different Native American nations drew attention to the issues plaguing them, such as the violation of treaties along with difficulties regarding termination, reservations, and the lack of services and resources for urban Native Americans, all while pursuing decolonization in a symbolically important way to emphasize the perpetuity of American colonialism in reduction of resources allotted to impoverished communities by the BIA. In their pursuit of cultural self-determination, many indigenous peoples during this time period faced resistance from non-Indian academics invested in potential research benefits of remains. James Riding In maintains that Native Americans are returned possession of their ancestors' remains, advocating "that American Indians receive what virtually every other group of American enjoys...the right to religious freedom and a lasting burial" (James Riding In Presents 531) and affirming that "[a]cts of stealing bodies, infringing on spirituality, and resisting repatriation efforts represent classic examples of oppression" (531). As colonization was how the dominant society obtained these remains, by holding onto them, they continue the system of oppression that Native Americans continue to face to this day. Native Americans, however, continued to practice cultural self-determination through the repatriation of remains and artifacts. The Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act "hastened the repatriation of material items and the return of...remains still possessed by historical societies, universities, and...museums" ("We Are," Ch. 6, 205). By advocating for repatriation, Native Americans achieved the success that was the NAGRA in order to prevent the disrespectful objectification of their culture and were able to better control cultural remains.
Further, Native Americans defined political self-determination as tribal leaders determining issues on their own in order to determine their future, often achieved through legal battles for land restitution and repatriation. Surprisingly, one of their greatest successes toward this goal was enabled by conservative President Richard Nixon, who recognized that the Native American "condition is the heritage of centuries of injustice" (Nixon Advocates 492) while crediting their history "of endurance, of survival, of adaptation and creativity" (493), stating that the Federal government must "recognize and build upon the capacities...of the Indian people" (493). By defining self-determination as involving Native American empowerment without threatening their sense of community and independence of federal control without cutting off federal support, Nixon created the atmosphere conducive for expanding Native American political self-determination and sovereignty. However, efforts continued to "to...secure restoration of land, particularly sacred sites, includ[ing] Taos Pueblo's sixty-four-year struggle with the US government" (IPH, Ch. 10, 179). Native Americans often demand "restoration, restitution, or repatriation of lands" (206) rather than reparations as "[n]o monetary amount can compensate for lands illegally seized, particularly those sacred lands necessary for Indigenous peoples to regain social coherence" (206) "as a relationship between people and place" (208). Native Americans often sought to extend their self-determination by the legal means of land restoration, as they often derived their personal and national identities from their homelands rather than viewing them as a commodity. Resorting to litigation, indigenous peoples like Elouise Cobell often fought for individual Native rights and the legal statuses of specific Native nations. Suing the federal government over the course of fourteen years for mismanagement after the end of allotment, Cobell fought "for three simple things...to fix the accounting systems...to give individual Indians an accounting...[a]nd...restitution to be paid to individual Indian people" (Elouise Cobell Describes 535). Extending even into the 21st century, the federal government has yet to fully make amends with Native Americans for the treaties they broke and the money it pocketed during allotment, so Native Americans have turned to the legal stage to ensure land restitution, a Native future through homelands, and education. To many such as Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, the U.S. still has a long way to come before fully making amends with the indigenous population. According to Dunbar-Ortiz, in order for the "US society [to] come to terms with its past" (IPH, Conclusion, 235) and "acknowledge responsibility" (235), the federal government must honor "the treaties the United States made...by restoring all sacred sites..and by payment of sufficient reparations for the construction and expansion of Native nations" (235-236). The dominant society has a responsibility to change by stopping its continued colonization of the Native American people, starting with allowing free undisturbed use of land and accountability.
In conclusion, the era of sovereignty and self-determination represented a momentous push for self-determination by urban Native Americans in resistance to the termination policies of the prior era through various forms of pan-tribal activism in order to achieve economic, cultural, and political self-determination; however, many tribal issues persist to the present day, and there will still be fights to overcome the dominant society's continued oppression of the Native population. Only after changes are made by the dominant society can the U.S. acknowledge its imperial past and right its wrongs against indigenous peoples.
