The coming of the 1960s marked the end of termination--a series of policies aimed at stripping Native Americans of their legal status as distinct peoples. However, the end of this era sparked the beginning of a series of efforts by indigenous peoples to achieve a level of self-determination unprecedented since the arrival of the Europeans in North America. Although indigenous peoples faced a variety of limits on their sovereignty by the dominant society, in the aftermath of termination, they exercised an unparalleled degree of economic, cultural, and political self-determination, particularly through Indian gaming, repatriation, and land restitution. Native nations have exercised their sovereignty by practicing economic self-determination, aided significantly by the introduction of Indian gaming. A result of the urbanization of Native Americans throughout and following termination, Native Americans experienced a variety of urban issues. The primarily urban twentieth and twenty-first century Native American population was disproportionately poor; though many were still connected to reservation spaces, there was an emphasis on solving these tribal issues with tribal programs, especially in health, education, and language, relying on tribal knowledge to help deal with the present. 6, 206-207), offering "Indian communities the chance to provide new jobs and new housing and thus enable more of their residents to remain on the land" (207). The IGRA provided nations with the money needed to exercise the economic autonomy guaranteed to them through treaties through infrastructure, healthcare, education, and political influence. This, in turn, allowed for greater cultural self-determination, as it allowed many Native Americans to remain in their homelands and continue to practice their customs as they saw fit. However, Native Americans were presented with the issue of non-Indian opposition to Indian gaming. Non-Indians usually saw Indian gaming as an unfair advantage that could be taken away; in reality, Native Americans hold the inherent right to economic self-determination and were guaranteed federal support through treaties in exchange for land. In the face of a variety of cultural issues such as lack of visibility, Native Americans have been able to achieve a great degree of cultural self-determination through pan-tribal movements and the repatriation of Native remains. Resultantly, pan-tribal movements such as the Occupation of Alcatraz or the Occupation of Wounded Knee focused on this cultural issue of visibility. "[O]n February 27, 1973, AIM [American Indian Movement] members and their allies took over the village of Wounded Knee" ("We Are," Ch. 6, 205). By advocating for repatriation, Native Americans achieved the success that was the NAGRA in order to prevent the disrespectful objectification of their culture and were able to better control cultural remains. Further, Native Americans defined political self-determination as tribal leaders determining issues on their own in order to determine their future, often achieved through legal battles for land restitution and repatriation. Surprisingly, one of their greatest successes toward this goal was enabled by conservative President Richard Nixon, who recognized that the Native American "condition is the heritage of centuries of injustice" (Nixon Advocates 492) while crediting their history "of endurance, of survival, of adaptation and creativity" (493), stating that the Federal government must "recognize and build upon the capacities...of the Indian people" (493). Suing the federal government over the course of fourteen years for mismanagement after the end of allotment, Cobell fought "for three simple things...to fix the accounting systems...to give individual Indians an accounting...[a]nd...restitution to be paid to individual Indian people" (Elouise Cobell Describes 535). Extending even into the 21st century, the federal government has yet to fully make amends with Native Americans for the treaties they broke and the money it pocketed during allotment, so Native Americans have turned to the legal stage to ensure land restitution, a Native future through homelands, and education. To many such as Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz, the U.S. The dominant society has a responsibility to change by stopping its continued colonization of the Native American people, starting with allowing free undisturbed use of land and accountability. Only after changes are made by the dominant society can the U.S. acknowledge its imperial past and right its wrongs against indigenous peoples. 